# Orientation

## Sun compass
A crucial observation for the study of bird orientation was the directional preferences of migratory ac-tivity behavior (Zugunruhe) by Kramer (1949). Using orientation cages the amount of activity and the preferred direction can be measured. This also allows experimenting with different cues that may affect bird orientation. 
That birds use the sun for orientation has first been shown by Karl Schmidt-Koenig (Schmidt-Koenig 1958, 1961). He shifted the internal clock of homing pigeons. This resulted in an expected directional error when homing to the loft. The sun is used as a compass. The brightest part of the sky, if visible, is interpreted as the sun and only the azimuth is important. Directions can be distinguished even when the sun is at elevations close to the zenit, e.g. at 87° (Wiltschko & Wiltschko 1999a).
At dusk and dawn, birds may use the polarization pattern of the light to determine the direction. But this is still a matter of open research (Muheim 2011).


##	Star compass
Sauer (1957) showed with experiments in the planetarium that birds use the stars for orientation. Indigo Buntings Passerina cyanea reversed their preferred direction in orientation experiments in a planetari-um when the northern stars were reflected to the south (Emlen 1967). Birds use the stars, like the sun, as a compass. That is, they can determine a direction from the stars but they are not able to read a position from them (true navigation). In contrast to the sun compass, the star compass is independent of the internal clock. Birds need to have the ability to observe the sky before they can use the star compass. Emlen (1970) raised birds in a planetarium that rotated around a different center. These birds, when tested during migration, moved away from the (not rotating) rotation center they learned earlier. Further experiments showed that only the learned rotation center matters. There is no innate map of stars (Wiltschko & Wiltschko 1999a). Also, migratory birds recalibrate their star compass along their migratory route based on the magnetic compass. This is important because the star pattern change when migrating along the north-south axis. 


##	Magnetic compass
The magnetic field seems to play a key role in the orientation of migratory birds. It looks like the birds' innate migration direction is based on the magnetic field (Wiltschko & Wiltschko 1999b). That birds use the magnetic field to determine their migration direction has first been shown by Merkel & Wiltschko (1965). They tested European Robins Erithacus rubicula during spring migration in the natural magnet-ic field as well as in magnetic fields of which the horizontal and the vertical component respectively was reflected. Under both artificial magnetic fields the Robins preferred southern instead of northern direc-tions. This and subsequent experiments revealed that birds can perceive the inclination angle of the magnetic field and that they are not sensitive to the direction of the field (Wiltschko & Wiltschko 1972). They use an inclination compass. The inclination compass is very precise: deviations of 2° from vertical can be perceived by birds in high Arctic zones (Muheim et al. 2003).
The ability to perceive the magnetic field is present in many organisms. Behavioral and physiological studies on taxonomically diverse animals suggest the presence of two fundamentally different, inde-pendent magnetoreception mechanisms that detect different parameters of the Earth’s magnetic field (Wiltschko & Wiltschko 1995). A light-dependent magnetic compass detects the axial alignment of the magnetic field, and a ferromineral-based mechanism provides positional magnetic map information (Phillips et al. 2010). However, the receptors still remain to be identified. In birds, the magnetite based mechanism is localised in the nostrils, whereas the light-dependent mechanism is localised in the reti-na. It depends on the wavelengths of the light the bird experiences (Muheim et al. 2002). Birds are bet-ter oriented in short wavelength environments. Further, the neural visual system is active when noctur-nally migrating passerines perform magnetic orientation (Heyers et al. 2007). However under long wavelengths, Robins were oriented well with intact nostrils but they were disoriented if the nostrils were anesthetized (Wiltschko et al. 2011). This indicates that they may also be able to use their nostrils for magnetic orientation when the visual system is not able to do so. 
The light-dependent magnetoreception mechanism is based on radical pairs (Ritz et al. 2000). Under some wavelengths, the retina produces pairs of radicals that either can spin parallel or in opposite di-rections. The ratio between the two spinning states depends on their orientation in the magnetic field. Therefore, birds seem to be able to “see” the magnetic field (Muheim et al. 2014). 


##	Landmarks
That birds use landmarks to find their nest or cache where they previously stored food has been shown at a local scale for several species (e.g. Duff et al. 1998). It is very likely that also migratory birds use landmarks, particularly for navigation (see below).


##	Olfactory cues
It has long been known that homing pigeons use olfactory cues for finding the way home. There is re-cent evidence that also other bird species including migratory birds use smell for their orientation. An-osmic shearwaters have difficulties to find back to their colony after a foraging trip (Padget et al. 2017). Tracking Catbirds Dumetella carolinensis on their autumn migration showed that adult birds treated with zinc sulphate to produce anosmia were unable to show the same orientation as control adults, and instead reverted to a direction similar to that shown by juveniles making their first migration. Experimen-tally offsetting the magneto-receptors had no effect on the orientation of either adults or juveniles. These results suggest that olfactory sense may play a role in experience based migration in adult cat-birds (Holland et al. 2009). The role of olfactory cues for the orientation on migration is subject to ongo-ing research.


##	Compass orientation vs. navigation
Compass orientation is the ability to move in the correct direction. Clock-and-compass orientation is the ability to move in the correct direction for a specific time (distance) so that a specific goal is reached. Compass or clock-and-compass is also called "vector navigation". True navigation is the ability to find a specific location of the world from any actual location, i.e. it involves the ability to identify the actual location and its relative position to the destination location. The difference between compass orientation and navigation has been shown in a famous displacement experiment by Perdeck (1958). He translo-cated more than 10000 Starlings Sturnus vulgaris that were on their autumn migration from the Nether-lands to Switzerland. Subsequent ring recovery locations of these translocated birds differed between adults and juveniles. Adults were found back in the normal wintering area, whereas juveniles were found further south outside of their normal winter range but in the correct migration direction from the release location. Thus adults were able to compensate for the displacement and navigate to their cor-rect winter range, whereas juveniles proceeded migration in the correct direction without compensating for the displacement.
Migratory birds use different compass systems depending on the circumstances (Muheim et al. 2003). The different orientation systems can be used in parallel, hierarchically or to calibrate each other. The interplay of the different systems is very complex and yet not fully understood.
Further reading on orientation: The state of the knowledge on orientation at that time is nicely summa-rized and reviewed by Wiltschko & Wiltschko (1999a). A more recent review with focus on the interplay between the different compass systems and the ontogeny of orientation is given in the book by Hans-son & Åkesson (2014).
 
